and now let us plunge in
at the very beginning now why do we say
that philosophy
and science started with the greeks in
the 6th century bc
because after all there had been human
beings for a long long time before that
there had been flourishing civilizations
long before this time uh
and uh surrounding greece there were the
phoenicians the egyptians the
babylonians and many others
and they had acquired a fair amount of
primitive knowledge and feels like
astronomy
mathematics and so on but none of them
except the greeks had anything that you
would call
philosophy now of course they had
philosophy implicitly by implication
every human being has some kind of code
of values and view of reality and
knowledge
but theirs was essentially by
implication
these non-greek civilizations insofar as
it was
explicit it was metaphorical
enormously mystical mythological
filled with parables and dogmas and so
on
and nothing that you would call a
self-conscious
or systematic or critical or rational
attempt
to raise and answer philosophic
questions
in this latter sense philosophy as a
self-conscious disciplined
rational phenomenon began in the sixth
century bc
in greece now what prevented all these
other civilizations from developing
philosophy
two things in regard to their view of
reality they believed that true reality
was some other dimension
superior to this one they believed
accordingly that nothing in this world
was
intelligible this world was a series of
events
operated by the gods behind the scenes
in another dimension
and there was no way of trying to
explain or understand this world
all you could do is bow pray and beg
because this world was basically simply
a byproduct of another dimension
they had the same view with regard to
ethics morality was simply a series of
injunctions by the appropriate gods and
you could make no more sense of morality
by a reason than you could of physical
phenomena and therefore there was no
possibility of
understanding the world in other words
they were supernaturalist cultures
and they meant it a consequence of that
was a second point which prevented them
from developing philosophy
they held that this life and this earth
are not only unintelligible but also
evil if you want to get their
perspective
and there's a vary to some extent
depending on the civilization but it's
pretty fair
statement imagine that you are caught in
a jail cell
now you will not in the normal case have
a
passion to discover the molecular
structure of the bars or the viscosity
of the air and so on and so on
you will want to get out of the jail
cell that will be your overriding
concern
and that was the overriding concern of
most of the non-greek cultures
this is perhaps best typified in regard
to
egypt the thing you think of of course
is the pyramids
and they are a monument not to life but
to death and the thing in egypt was not
how good a life could you live but how
good a death could you die
in other words these previous cultures
took religion
seriously and the result was a complete
nullification or failure to develop
philosophic ability greece
was however an exception
as one commentator puts it it wasn't i'm
quoting now
it was quote an oasis almost completely
surrounded by barbarian custom
and savage practice unquote
now why what about the greeks made it
possible
well it's two things partly political
partly religious now on the political
i'll ask you to see ordinary histories
which are reliable on this point
uh what it amounts to is that the greeks
by the sixth century bc
owing to various factors that achieved a
comparative degree of political freedom
the powerful monarchies of the earlier
centuries
had given way to the freer city-states
and
in that climate philosophy and science
could develop
i might note parenthetically that
wherever government remains
strong philosophy never took root and
the classic example of that is sparta
which never had a philosophic thought
so far as you can tell from what they
live so if political conditions are one
the other
is religion now the greeks had a very
peculiar religion
uh the religion as you know of the gods
of mount olympus
and according to that view the gods were
not
creators of the world they were not
rulers or directors of the world
the greeks believed all greeks believed
that the universe had
always existed that it was a natural
product a
phenomenon that the gods are simply one
natural evolutionary development along
with everything else
the gods therefore could not interfere
in any major way with the operation of
the universe
the greeks had a saying which is dubious
but nevertheless they had it
uh nothing in excess and
uh the idea was that that applies to the
gods also they have their own place and
as long as they keep their place okay
but if they get out of hand
the reality will fix them
so the gods were in effect streamlined
men they were
elder uh brothers to man in fact they
were not something you grovel before
they were not omnipotent they were not
omniscient you were not
to fear them as a result the greeks held
that this world is
intelligible and it was a good place
in which to live you know their statues
that was their concept of what is
realistic
they thought that this was a good world
it was a
friendly happy place you could achieve
enjoyment
and ease during life on earth and
therefore they wanted to make something
of life on earth
now they believed in a shadowy
immortality of sorts
but they didn't yearn for it for
instance in one of homer's works the
ghost of achilles
says in a very representative statement
that he would rather
live on earth as the slave of a man
even of a poor man which is a big
disgrace to be the slave of a poor man
rather than to be the king and the ruler
of the whole other world
and that is a typically greek attitude
you see a very pro-this life
attitude there were exceptions as we'll
see later tonight but this was the
dominant chant
for these reasons because knowledge was
possible
because it was worthwhile the greeks
developed a love of knowledge they
developed fellain for sophia
uh they took ideas seriously and we had
for the first time the development
of a civilization of thinkers
now what did they think about the first
things that
interested them uh were
twofold two different phenomena now i
emphasize that we're at a period where
we know essentially nothing i need that
is
to say they know essentially nothing
there's no philosophy yet
and no systematic science so of course
the
first observations are going to be by
their nature very
elementary the first two things that
interested them if you're taking notes i
would take this down
are change and multiplicity
now let's explain what we mean by each
of those things
because they're going to run throughout
the course
by change we mean anything that happens
anything that happens mental or physical
any occurrence any event any motion
any activity winter
and then spring and then summer and then
fall
and so on in a cycle that's change
a thing is born and grows and reaches
its
uh maturity and then dies and decays and
turns to dust that's change
life and death waking and then sleeping
day becomes nights wet things become dry
and cold things become
hot and light things become dark etc
now you know about rivers rushing off to
where they're going and landslides
the idea is clear now
what interested them about change well
i'll take an example
that they obviously did not use not
having paper matches from nevada
i'll engage in a process of change
before your eyes
for those hearing this on tape i'm
letting a match
now here is a process of change
i observe this match that i have
all right now it's undergone a process
of change in fact to it
there was something white and flickering
and hot and now it's vanished and
something black and so on it's taking
its place
and hot now that's a simple example of
change in the questions that they wanted
to know is how do we make sense of this
where did the flame come from it wasn't
there and now it is
where did the smoke come from it wasn't
where did the white tip go to the cold
hard white tip which was there and now
isn't
how did we get from one state to the
other state how are the two states
related that was the first question that
they asked with regard to the phenomenon
of change
and now with regards to
what does that mean and what was the
question
multiplicity is a big word for many
the greeks were impressed by the fact
that there are great many things making
up the world
the physical world there are shoes and
ships and sealing wax and cabbages and
kings if there were only cabbages this
question wouldn't have come up but
there's all kinds of different things
and the question that they asked is what
is the relationship between
all of these different things there must
they thought be some sort of common
denominator
uniting or tying together all these
different things
could it be they asked in effect not
using these examples could it possibly
be that the only thing there is to say
about bananas is that they're made out
of banana stuff
and that's it and tomatoes are made out
of tomato stuff
television is made out of television set
stuff and that's it
no they said that's impossible there
must be some sort of relationships tying
all these many things together
making them part of one universe after
all some of them change into others
so the two issues are tied together you
see water becomes ice so there have to
be something
in common to make it possible for one of
them to become the other
well how are we going to do this
now against this background we can
introduce the father of philosophy
the man who put the first answer forth
to these questions and as far as we know
was the first one to ask the question
his name is thales t-h-a-l-e-s
he flourished in 585 bc he's regarded as
the father of philosophy with a capital
f
as i say we have only four sentences of
his left
so you could become a world authority on
theories
he comes from a town in asia minor
called miletus
and therefore the school that he founded
is called the my lesions
m-i-l-e-s-i-a-n-s
and he put forth essentially the
following hypothesis now i'm
reconstructing but
it seems to be justified he put forth
the idea that there is
one fundamental stuff which makes up the
entire universe
everything bananas philosophers and
ceiling wax
and everything else are made of this one
ingredient
which he called or subsequently was
called the world stuff
the stuff that makes up the world and
everything that's in it
now this view that there is only one
stuff which makes up the world came to
be called
monism m-o-n-i-s-m from the view though
you say that there's only one such stuff
now his reasoning seemed to be that
if there was one stuff we could explain
how everything is related
all the many things will be just many
different forms of the one stuff
and we'll be able to explain change
because change will simply be
one form of that stuff becoming another
form of that stuff and therefore we'll
have a common denominator
uniting and tying everything together
now of course there's no warrant for the
view that there's only one
such stuff but the approach that he is
attempting here
was of incalculable importance it is the
approach which to this day
is the essence of the scientific
approach the attempt to find
unity amid diversity to find
common denominators to enable us to
integrate a whole wealth of disparate
observations
the whole process of physics for
instance has been started with a whole
series of laws
and then newton comes along and shows
that you can reduce them to just a few
laws and einstein to just a fewer laws
and so on
constantly seeking for unity
in the face of diversity the same is
true of chemistry
which took the endless stuffs of the
world and tried to find them in 90 or
100 odd elements and then the physicists
came in and tried to reduce those
elements down to eight or ten building
blocks
and so on that attempt was inaugurated
by
thieles and what he was looking for if
we used the greek terminology was
he wanted the one in the many
the one in the many that's clear
right i would write that down if you're
taking notes because that's very
important and another way in which it
was described was
it is the permanent amid the changing
the thing which is
always there and which is all the
changing things are simply different
forms of now
as to thale's view as to what is
the one in the many what is the world
stuff it is of course very primitive
he held that it was water
then he is sometimes jocularly was
described as a
hydromonist but that is
carrying terminology to the point of
insanity
uh he held it on the basis of
observations which are
sensible within this frame of knowledge
water was the one thing he could observe
that could take on solid liquid and
gaseous form
water seemed to to be able to turn into
air because when you put a dish of it
out the next day it was gone and all
that was left was air
that's of course evaporation a
phenomenon he didn't know about earth
seem to turn into water because you dig
in the earth you find
water of course underground springs
which they regarded as
earth turning into water water can
become solid as in the form of ice
water dries up and sometimes you find
little wriggling living creatures which
suggest
a central connection between water and
life and so on
now uh for all of that type of reasons
he said that water
is the one in the emitting in the many
now he's wrong of course
but the importance of thales is the
question and the category of answer
not the specific answer he was the one
who established the idea of a
naturalistic approach to the world
rather than a supernaturalistic one who
dispensed with the supernatural with
gods
as explanatory principles who introduced
the idea that there are
natural laws in the nature of things
governing what takes place and that we
can account for
the entire phenomena that we observe by
reference to one
logical reality and he also suggested by
implication
that the indispensable precondition of
it all was
sense observation but that alone would
confront us with the
would tell us the nature of reality
now of course all of this is simply
implied from the four sentences that he
left us
but it was essentially there
so much for the father of philosophy
uh he had a number of successors in the
my legion school
which we are going to pass over without
mention you can get them from a history
book if you want
uh some of them weren't as good as he
was and some were more advanced
and they speculated that the world stuff
wasn't
water one of them thought it was air one
of them thought it was earth and another
one had his own weird
view as to what it was but in any event
that's as detailed as we can pass over
science philosophy although very
primitive was nicely started